PostgreSQL Installation
To install PostgreSQL, run the following command = sudo apt install postgresql
To add some additional utilities and functionalities. = sudo apt install postgresql postgresql-contrib
Once installed, switch to the Postgres user and access the PostgreSQL prompt = sudo -i -u postgres
Now, we can access the Postgres prompt using psqlcommand.


Working With Databases in PostgreSQL

Creating a Database
TheCREATE DATABASE command is used to create the database.

syntax = CREATE DATABASE database_name;
Example:
create-database
create database

Creating a Table
Now, to store the data, we need the table. The CREATE TABLEstatement is used to create the table.

Syntax:

CREATE TABLE table_name
(column_1 data_type,
column_2 data_type,
...
column_n data_type);
Example:

create-table
create table
Explanation:

This command creates an Student table with three columns: roll, student_name and course . The roll column is a serial primary key, meaning it will auto-increment with each new row added.TheINSERTcommand is used to insert the new record (row) into the table.

Inserting Data into a Table
To insert a new record (row) into a table, use the INSERT INTO command.

Syntax: 

INSERT INTO table_name (column_1, column_2 ,...)
VALUES(value_1, value_2, ...);
Example:

insert-into-table
insert into table
Explanation:

This query inserts a new row into the Student table with the student name ANDREW, roll number 1, and course MCA.

Selecting Data from a Table
The SELECTstatement is used to fetch the data from a database table, which returns the data in the form of a result table.

Syntax: 

SELECT  
column_1, column_2, .. column_n
FROM
table_name;
Example:

Select-command
Select command
Explanation:

This query retrieves the roll number and student name columns from the Student table. If we want to select all columns, we can use an asterisk *.

Filtering Data with the WHERE Clause
TheWHEREclause is used to filter results returned by the SELECT statement.

Syntax:

SELECT column_name
FROM 
table_name 
WHERE condition;
Example:

where-clause
Where clause
Explanation:

This query selects all the records from the student table where course name is MCA.

Using the LIMIT Clause
TheLIMITclause is used to get a subset of rows generated by a query. This clause is optional and helps control the number of rows retrieved. OFFSETnskips 'n' rows before beginning to return rows.

Syntax:

SELECT * 
FROM table_name 
LIMIT n;
Example:

Limit-and-Offset
Limit & Offset
Explanation:

LIMIT n: Specifies the maximum number of rows to return.
OFFSET m: Skips the first m rows and starts returning rows from the next one.
This query returns 3 rows from the Student table, but skips the first 1 row.

Modifying Table Structure with ALTER TABLE
The structure of an existing table can be modified using the ALTER TABLE statement. PostgreSQL supports the various actions to perform with ALTER TABLE as listed below:

Add a column to an existing table
ALTER TABLE table_name ADD COLUMN new_column_name TYPE;
Drop a column from an existing table
ALTER TABLE table_name DROP COLUMN column_name;
Rename a column from an existing table
ALTER TABLE table_name RENAME COLUMN column_name TO new_column_name;
Rename a column from an existing table
ALTER TABLE table_name ALTER COLUMN column_name [SET DEFAULT value | DROP DEFAULT];
Change NOT NULL constraint
ALTER TABLE table_name ALTER COLUMN column_name [SET NOT NULL| DROP NOT NULL];
Add CHECK constraints to a column
ALTER TABLE table_name ADD CHECK expression;
Add a constraint
ALTER TABLE table_name ADD CONSTRAINT constraint_name constraint_definition;
Rename an existing table
ALTER TABLE table_name RENAME TO new_table_name;
Updating Data in PostgreSQL
The UPDATE statement is used to modify existing data in a table. We can update one or multiple columns by specifying the column values and a condition for the rows we want to update.

Syntax:

UPDATE table_name
SET column_1 = value_1,
   column_2 = value_2, ...
WHERE
   condition_1 AND condition_2;
Example:

update
Update
Explanation:

This query updates the course of the Student to MCA where roll number is 4.

Deleting Data in PostgreSQL
The DELETE statement is used to remove rows from a table. We can delete all rows or specific rows based on a condition.

Syntax:

DELETE FROM table_name
WHERE condition;
Example:

delete